Chock full o' studies
Coffee has been studied a lot, and not just recently.
The Harvard Health Professionals Follow-Up Study, which began in 1986, and the Nurses' Health Study, which started in 1976, have been following coffee consumption habits of healthy men and women for decades.
"We did not find any relationship between coffee consumption and increased risk of death from any cause, death from cancer, or death from cardiovascular disease. Even people who drank up to six cups of coffee per day were at no higher risk of death," writes Dr. Rob van Dam of Harvard's School of Health.
Coffee drinking linked to longer life
So why was coffee given a bad rap for so long?
Earlier studies didn't always factor out serious health behaviors that used to go along with coffee, such as smoking and a lack of physical activity. Today's coffee drinker doesn't necessarily fit that mold and researchers are more likely to screen for those behaviors in their results.
Make mine a tea
While the health benefits of coffee keep rolling in, the complete story isn't so rosy. In some studies, very high consumption -- six or more cups a day -- reduced the benefits.
Some populations can find coffee consumption potentially harmful. People with sleep issues or uncontrolled diabetes may need to ask their doctors before adding caffeine to their diets. There's also a concern about caffeine use among youths.
And there's a genetic mutation many of us have that can affect how fast our bodies metabolize caffeine. The gene is called CYP1A2 -- if you have the slow version, it would explain why you crawl the walls after only a cup or two or why it might contribute to your high blood pressure.
Women should take particular note. Coffee may increase menopausal hot flashes. And pregnant women might be more likely to miscarry -- the jury is still out -- but caffeine does reach the fetus and might restrict growth. Doctors recommend only a cup a day during pregnancy.
And interestingly enough, the way you make your coffee could also make a health difference -- there's a compound called cafestol in the oily part of coffee that can increase your bad cholesterol or LDL. It's caught in the paper filters, so as long as you use those to make your morning joe, you should be fine. But if you're a lover of French press, Turkish coffee or the boiled coffee popular in Scandinavian countries, you could be putting your health at risk.
For many of us, coffee is a blessing. And as long as you avoid its pitfalls, current science seems to be saying you can continue to enjoy it, guilt free.
Coffee good for you, but it's OK to hold back 
